Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crute and Bill Vernon. Practicing physicist Robert L. Forwood is also a science fiction writer.
After writing science fact articles in the magazines for almost 20 years, Forwood recently published his first science fiction novel,
Dragon's Egg. When we asked Forwood how he began writing science fiction, he claimed he was tricked into doing it.
But the way I got into actually writing fiction was Larry Niven tricked me.
Here he explains how he innocently offered to help Larry Niven.
Larry Niven and Jerry Purnell were running a lecture series at UCLA.
Invited me to come and give a scientific talk on gravity as part of their series. It was how science fiction and science interact.
And at the close of one of the sessions that Larry was talking on, he said he wanted to write a story about beings that lived on a neutron star.
Frank Drake had mentioned this idea a number of years before. He said he really wanted to write that story.
And that night at the cocktail party that they threw, I said, Larry, I'll tell you what I'll do.
I will work up all the scientific details behind the story because I know a lot about neutron star physics.
And it would be a fun story to read and I'd like to read hard science fiction.
And what I'd like to do is give you enough facts so that you can write a really hard science fiction story without too many errors in it.
When Forwood finished his part, Niven was still busy, so Forwood continued the work himself.
And so I worked up all the science and gave him about 25, 30 pages of notes.
And he said, gee, I'm busy right now working with Jerry Pornel on something called Lucifer's Hammer.
And I'm pretty busy. I'll tell you what we'll do. Why don't we just sort of make this a collaboration.
You may write the first draft of the story. And then I'll take it over from there and rewrite the thing.
And you're not a writer, and I am. And that we will get the best of both worlds.
Well, so I went back and wrote the first draft. And when I came back, he was still busy.
And so I ended up finding out that I wanted to read this story.
And the only way I could read that story was to write it first, so I had to write it.
And so Larry and Niven tricked me into getting into science fiction.
But Larry Niven didn't abandon Forwood after tricking him into writing a novel.
He advised Forwood on many aspects, including a major plot element.
Larry Niven basically gave the thousand to one, I mean excuse me, the million to one time difference.
And the main thing that he brought out was the fact that the important part of the story was not all the science, which would have been in my tendency to write,
but the problems of how do you communicate with somebody that lives and dies a million times faster than you do.
And if those beings, since they would be thinking a million times faster than you, would figure out that you were there long before you could figure out they were there,
and they had to figure out a way to communicate with you and signal you that they were there before you left.
And so he mentioned the fact that, for instance, one somebody on the neutron star would have to climb a mountain and send a signal,
and that might take them many generations.
Actually, in the story I compressed it into one generation basically.
But that was the kind of attitude that he brought toward the story that helped a lot.
More on Robert Ford tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The next episode will be about the science fiction radio show.
Stay with us!
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
In our last show we learned how Robert Ford was tricked into writing the manuscript which evolved into his novel, Dragon's Egg.
Larry Niven helped forward flesh out his ideas, but it was Lester Del Rey who helped him polish the manuscript into a novel.
My very first draft, of course, was quite rough from a writing point of view.
And when Lester looked at it he saw some potential in it,
but as it was, as the manuscript was sent to him, it wasn't acceptable, it wasn't a book.
And he sat down and typed up 14 pages, single-spaced, of detailed criticism of the manuscript.
And those 14 pages, when I followed them to the letter, and I don't think I disagreed with him on but say one or two things,
when I went back through the manuscript and took his suggestions and then looked at the result, resultants,
it began to be readable instead of being a science fact article, I guess.
It had some flow, it had some characterization, but it still was a hard science fiction novel.
In Dragon's Egg, Ford takes a hard science approach to a situation in which beings who inhabit a neutron star
learn of the humans who are orbiting their star, then establish communications with them.
The task is made difficult, though, by the fact that the aliens live at a pace
roughly a million times faster than that of humans.
Thus an individual alien, or chila, lives out its entire life in several human minutes.
The chila, being native to a neutron star, with its intense gravitational and magnetic fields
and extremely dense matter, are certainly constructed different from humans.
Here Ford tells us about the aliens, their environment, and their names.
Once I had placed my imagination and myself on the surface of the neutron star,
now once I knew the territory well enough, and appreciated the fact that the light on this star comes from below, not above,
but the sky is black, there's no light coming out of it except a few stars.
Everything is a glow from below, and the territory is very flat because of the terrific gravity.
I began to sort of appreciate what it was like there, and what I basically did was take the Indian technique
of naming children about things that occurred shortly after they were born,
and applied it to the chila, but put in a hyphen so it would take out the Indian context,
and also, of course, a lot of the Indian things like eagles and feathers and the sky and things like that
that don't exist, so I had to do that transfer.
The chila's social structure differs from ours as well, though there are some similarities.
Soon I began to realize that in my dreaming up of these creatures, I'd end up with a social structure
that was sort of halfway between a Scottish clan and an Indian tribe,
and as if both the Indians and the Scottish were crocodiles that laid eggs
instead of having the problems of mammals that they had to take care of their young.
The younger, immediately viable, and crocodiles and turtles, and so are the little tiny chila.
So what I tried to do was imagine what it would be like if, instead of monkeys developing intelligent
social interactions, crocodiles developed intelligent social interactions.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The next episode will be about the science fiction radio show.
Stay with us!
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz and Bill Vernon.
Although science fiction is a literature ostensibly about science, the effects of technology,
or a future where science is very much present, or in some cases very much absent,
it is mainly written by non-scientists.
Some writers do have undergraduate degrees in the sciences,
Hull Anderson, Arthur C. Clark, Joe Haldeman, and Charles Harness, to name a few,
and certainly most other writers have had some coursework in the sciences.
But there are a few scientists who write science fiction.
Practicing scientists who write it include Gregory Benford,
John Slanzowski, Fred Hoyle, David Brinn and Tony Rothman, and a notable ex-scientist Isaac Esimov.
Another practicing scientist who writes science fiction is physicist Robert Ford,
whose novel Dragon's Egg we have discussed previously.
We asked forward what enjoyment he reaps from being a scientist and writing science fiction.
Writing is a process of selling science.
I mean, I have always felt that part of my job as a scientist was to try and communicate
the first, the facts of science, and second, the excitement of science
to the general public that is not involved in science,
because science is at the cutting edge of our intellectual achievements,
whether it's physical sciences, chemical sciences, biological or social, or whatever sciences.
This is where we're developing as an intelligent being.
And we're learning more about the world around us and how we operate in that world.
And it's very exciting to be involved in that.
And you don't get much, many scientists, admitting that it's exciting, but it is.
I mean, it's part of the reasons you get professors working at wages less than they would if they were a plumber.
It is more fun to be a scientist, but most of them are so hidebound and so concerned about their image,
but they don't want to admit that they're having fun.
Well, I admit I'm having fun being a scientist, and I think it's fun.
I think that's fun and the excitement, and everything else can be communicated to the general public
so that their awareness of the fact that they're part of an intellectual and evolutionary advance as an intelligent being
can be given to them.
And I think that's one of the reasons why we have such a spurt of magazines today, like Omni and Science 80,
and the Smithsonian and others that have, and the Discovery.
All of these magazines are beginning to realize that people want to be part of the leading edge of our cultural evolution.
And I found that I have the ability to communicate that.
Now, for many years, I would only write science articles, not fiction.
I wouldn't have a story.
I'd just say, here's something interesting I found at the Outskirts of Science, and isn't it wonderful,
and isn't it great, and I'd write it down to whatever level was there.
And those were science speculation articles, but I'm sold in analog and Omni in places like that.
And I finding that doing it in the form of fiction reaches more people.
Music
Although Ford is becoming better known in the science fiction community because of Dragon's Egg,
he has been in the field for many years writing science fact articles for the science fiction magazines.
Certainly, science fiction benefits when people with not only the scientific background,
but the enthusiasm of Robert Forward contribute to it.
Music
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Music
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
Music
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
One of the most unique of all science fiction novels is Norman Spinrad's The Iron Dream.
Though Spinrad did indeed write the book, he presents it as if it were written by Adolf Hitler.
Spinrad bases the book on a provocative supposition.
Suppose Hitler, instead of leading the Nazi party to power in Germany,
had come to this country and become a science fiction writer.
What kind of books would he have written?
The Iron Dream is Spinrad's answer to that question.
He wrote the book exactly as he believes Hitler would have.
Spinrad says it was a difficult book to write.
Because in order to write that book, I had to write like Hitler.
And in order to get to that point, I had to read everything that Hitler had written,
which is very boring indeed.
And I had to also read a book called Hitler's Dinner Conversations,
like 800 pages of Hitler's babbling to the dinner table,
which was taken down to short in by Martin Borman, a fascinating book.
But in order to write the bulk of that book, Hitler's novel, inside the book,
I had a write like Hitler.
I had to get inside Hitler's head.
That was not what I could consider a fun experience.
And so it was a very difficult book to write.
And kind of a shattering book to write because of the kind of position I put myself in.
Also, of course, Hitler was a terrible writer.
In order to be accurate, I really had to write something awful in a way.
And I was trying to, you know, also Hitler was getting crazier and crazier as he's writing the book.
So I got crazier and crazier as I was writing the book.
Hitler's main character is Farrick Jagger, a sword and sorcery type hero.
Jagger fights to preserve the racial purity of humanity
against hordes of genetically inferior mutants.
And in every way, SpinRed tries to create a novel
like Pulp Science fiction writer with Hitler's political and racial views
and writing skills would have produced.
The book, of course, is a classic, anti-fascist novel.
We asked SpinRed if anyone had ever completely misunderstood it
and thought he was admiring Hitler.
No, the only kind of misunderstanding that I read in the review that I really got
was a little bit different.
It was somebody who said, well, this is really well good fun, you know.
I really enjoyed this book.
Why don't you have to muck it up with all this stuff about Hitler
and all the extraneous paraphernalia, just a good, you know, rousing adventure tale?
That is the only kind of misreading of the book that's really taken place.
Actually, I have not been calling off your fascist point, anyone, that I know of.
That's the connection with that book.
SpinRed explains where the idea for such a unique experiment came from.
Well, the impetus came from our conversation with Mike Wilcock in London
where I was living at the time about how he wrote Sword and Sorcery
and how he used Freudian imagery and, you know, the basic, you know,
the basic appeal of Sword and Sorcery.
And that gave me the idea that if Hitler had not, you know, become a Fuhrer of Germany,
he could have as well winded up writing Sword and Sorcery.
And I've always been, you know, fascinated with the whole question of how a thing like nonsense
could really happen.
And none of the stuff I had read about that really satisfied me, you know,
political or economic or conventional explanations of how this happened.
And the two things came together.
And I, you know, had my insight about Nazism was that it was a psychosexual phenomenon
that had looked into power by, in effect, manipulating imagery
and psychosexual substructures rather than bio-coherent economic program and so forth.
And so that was the base.
And then, you know, this had a certain correlation with certain kind of Sword and Sorcery
and that was the basic impetus that generated the book.
The Iron Dream was published in 1972.
It won the pre-Apollo Award in France and was recently reissued in this country by Timescape Books.
And when it was first published in Germany not too long ago, it was banned.
We'll have that story next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show
And next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Early in 1982, Norman Spinrad's Science Fiction novel, The Iron Dream, was totally banned in Germany.
As we explained last time, the book is an anti-fascist novel.
Though Spinrad pretends the book was written by Adolf Hitler,
it is actually a brilliant criticism of the political and racial views held by Hitler.
Spinrad says the book has been well received in all the countries where it's been published.
And it's been extensively reviewed in about eight different countries.
There's no, I have no, no instance where the book was misunderstood
and was taken as anything but an anti-nazis and anti-fascist novel.
Throughout the world.
We asked Spinrad if anyone could possibly misunderstand his intentions in The Iron Dream.
He said he didn't understand any.
I mean, you know, Hinkley certainly misunderstood St. Taxi driver.
So there's always schizophrenics and maniacs around who can misunderstand anything.
I mean, David Harwitz heard demons in his head.
I mean, there are always completely crazy people who can read things out of something that were never in there.
So if you wanted two people around, you know, psychotics who could get anything out of any book.
But I don't, I, see, the book is written on two levels.
The sophisticated readers, they understand what it is to begin with.
The other level is that the kind of people who are into things like Perry Rodin
and that kind of proto-fascist science fantasy
would start off reading the book, maybe identifying with Farrick Jagger,
you know, a third of the way into it, and suddenly realizing what it is they're identifying with.
And so it becomes a kind of deprogramming experience for the kind of people that they claim would be harmed.
I think it would be a very strongly anti-Nazi book
precisely for those kinds of young people who might have leanings in that direction
because they would then be confronted with what it is that they're really identifying with.
We also asked Spinrad what his reaction to the band was.
My reaction to the band is very complicated.
First of all, it took ten years to get this book published in Germany.
All my French friends said it would never be published in Germany.
So when a Heineberg, you know, summing up the courage to publish it, I was very pleased
and I thought that this was going to, you know, that this represented a kind of maturity on the part of Germany
that they're willing to look at this stuff.
And I felt very good about it being published there and I was a bit surprised.
Now that it's banned, obviously I feel that, well, the book says it all.
Well, the book itself, in a way, is about why it was banned
because it's the same sort of mentality that goes around banning books
that resulted in a different kind of way in the Third Reich.
It's not to say that all Germans are like this because the publisher has fought this all the way and is continuing to find it.
Most of the German newspapers, there's been a lot of coverage of support of the book against the band.
The German chapter of World SF had a vote and issued a public statement against the band in supporting the book.
So, you know, I think it's a very retrogressive thing and it says something about, I suppose, the German political and social system
is that they do not understand the concept that is embodied in the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
And it's a particularly pernicious law because anything can be banned under this law
or under the ground that it's not fit for children, even if it's not intended for children.
Which is exactly the kind of thing that the moral majority is trying to do here,
which tells you what kind of people they are, too.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.